Research Discussion 3
================

## In what ways do you think Recommender Systems reinforce human bias?

To some extent, the entire premise of a Recommender System is based on
confirmation bias. The purpose of a model is very often to learn what a
user likes or says they like. Using that information as a tool for
prediction, it is a feature (not a bug) of the model to predict that
users will like items similar to what they have liked in the past. If I
like books on sports, a model that recommends me books on sports will
usually be more accurate than a model that recommends me books on
plants. We can also see how this might create a feedback loop where I
read only sports books, thereby reinforcing the model that recommends me
more sports
books.

## Reflecting on the techniques we have covered, do you think recommender systems reinforce or help to prevent unethical targeting or customer segmentation?

As mentioned above, it is often the intent of a recommendation system to
reinforce past behavior. Whether this in and of itself can be considered
unethical is a debatable topic. My own personal stance on the general
subject is:  
I believe the obligation is largely on us as people (the users of
science, math, and technology) to be aware of and combat confirmation
bias and other ethical issues. I do not believe it is the duty of
companies, corporations, technology, statistical models, or data
scientists to inject morality into our lives. If I read too many books
on sports, it is my responsibility to recognize this and branch out. It
is not the responsibility of a recommender system to force me to branch
out.

The reason for my view is simple. I believe it imperative for empirical
science to remain unpolluted and separate from morality (at least as
separate as possible.) While it may or may not be politically correct to
say “Men prefer sports books more than women do”, I believe the
empirical truth of the statement should stand on its own. It is a
completely different statement to say “Men *should* prefer sports books
more than women do.” The latter is a declaration of morality. This
morality should always be evaluated and challenged by us as a society.
If we believe there should be more women interested in sports we should
absolutely bring the subject to the foreground and raise awareness. I do
not believe a company whose sole business is making a profit selling
books has a moral obligation to recommend more sports books to women if
the empirical data does not support it.

As usual, there may be exceptions. In particular statistical models that
have influence over people’s civil liberties (e.g., the examination of
recidivism rates, etc.) might require special scrutiny and treatment.
But these should usually be the exception and not the rule. By and large
models that rely on empirical data should not be “fudged” to reflect one
particular view of morality.

We as humans have a duty to continually assess issues of bias and
ethics. We should continue to raise awareness of the topics of morality
and fairness. The powerful and beautiful thing about science is that it
is objective and therefore “fair” in a different sort of way. I believe
true fairness is ultimately reached by keeping empiricism and ethics
largely separate.
